ctools examples
===============

This folder contains Python example scripts that illustrate the usage of
the ctools.

`generate_prod3_irfs/py`
>  Generates Prod3 Instrument Response Functions from FITS files.

`make_pointings.py`
>  Creates pointings for CTA surveys. For the moment the Galactic Plane
>  Survey (gps), the Extragalactic Survey (extgal), the Galactic Centre
>  Survey (gc) and the LMC survey (lmc) are implemented. The script outputs
>  and ASCII file that can be used by csobsdef.

`make_spectrum.py`
>  Simulates events and generates a spectrum from the using csspec.

`make_ts_distributions.py`
>  Creates TS distributions as function of energy for an OFF observaition
>  of 50 hours effective observing time. If the Python processing module is
>  installed the script can make use of multiple cores and runs in parallel.

`pipeline_binned_disk.py`
>  Example pipeline for simulating events and performing a binned analysis
>  by saving intermediate results to disk.

`pipeline_binned_mem.py`
>  Example pipeline for simulating events and performing a binned analysis
>  in memory. No files will be written to disk.

`pipeline_stacked_disk.py`
>  Example pipeline for simulating events and performing a stacked analysis
>  by saving intermediate results to disk.

`pipeline_stacked_mem.py`
>  Example pipeline for simulating events and performing a stacked analysis
>  in memory. No files will be written to disk.

`pipeline_unbinned_disk.py`
>  Example pipeline for simulating events and performing an unbinned analysis
>  by saving intermediate results to disk.

`pipeline_unbinned_mem.py`
>  Example pipeline for simulating events and performing an unbinned analysis
>  in memory. No files will be written to disk.

`show_butterfly.py`
>  Displays a butterfly generated using the ctbutterfly tool.

`show_model.py`
>  Displays a spectral model.

`show_pha.py`
>  Displays a spectrum in PHA format.

`show_pull_evolution.py`
>  Displays the evolution of the mean and rms pull as function of number of
>  trials.

`show_pull_histogram.py`
>  Displays pull histograms generated by the cspull script.

`show_response.py`
>  Displays one or several CTA response functions.

`show_sensitivity.py`
>  Displays the sensitivity generated by the cssens script.

`show_spectrum.py`
>  Displays spectrum generated by the csspec script.

`show_lightcurve.py`
>  Displays lightcurve generated by the cslightcrv script.

`show_ts_distribution.py`
>  Displays Test Statistic histograms generated using the cstsdist script.
